.TH "Speed Dreams 2 translation tool" "6" "December 2025" "Speed Dreams 2.x" "Games"
.SH NAME
sd2-translate \- Translation tool for Speed Dreams 2
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsd2-translate\fP  [-v|--version] [-h|--help]
              [-l|--localdir <dir path>] [-L|--libdir <dir path>]
              [-B|--bindir <dir path>] [-D|--datadir <dir path>]
              [-e|--tracelevel <integer>] [-t|--tracestream stdout|stderr|<file name>]
              [-m|--hardmouse]
              t|--target <target> [-l|--language <language>]
              [-r|--ref <ref=cat>] [-i|--input <infile>] [-o|--output <outfile>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsd2-translate\fP is a command-line translation tool, specifically tailored
for Speed Dreams 2. It cannot be used as a generic translation tool for other
applications since it is designed to perform several heuristics required by
Speed Dreams' design.

By default, \fBsd2-translate\fP runs in interactive mode, which means the
user shall be prompted with strings to translate, and the tool shall then
read the translated strings over standard input, one per line.

The example below shows \fBsd2-translate\fP asking for a translation of the
string \fBLaps\fP:

.PP
.in +4n
.EX
File: <data-prefix>/data/config/osghudconfig.xml
Section: widgets/carstatusWidget/fuel-info-laps-description
Key: text
Original text: "Laps"
Reference language text (cat): "Voltes"
.EE
.in
.PP

Following the example above, a Spanish translation would require the user
to insert the string \fBVueltas\fP over standard input.

A typical interactive session tells the user the number of total
translatable strings, how many of them are unique (i.e., not repeated accross
the data prefix) and how many have been already translated:

.PP
.in +4n
.EX
Info    649 entries, 506 of them unique, 0 translated (0.0%)
.EE
.in
.PP

Every time the user provides a new translated string, the stats are
reported again.

A session ends when either all strings have been translated or the user decides
to exit by inserting an end-of-file character over standard input. On Unix-like
systems, this can be achieved by pressing \fBCtrl+D\fP, or \fBEnter\fP and then
\fBCtrl+Z\fP on Windows systems. When a session ends, \fBsd2-translate\fP
automatically updates any required parameter files inside the data prefix,
and inserts the language code/name pair into \fBdata/menu/languagemenu.xml\fP
if not already present.

Perhaps more interestingly, \fBsd2-translate\fP can be also used
non-interactively. In other words, it can read a line-separated list of
translated entries over standard input, with a reference list provided via the
\fB-i|--input\fP flag. A reference list can be obtained via the
\fB-o|--output\fP flag.

This makes it easier to perform translations with automatic tools, such as
LibreTranslate. This flag tells \fBsd2-translate\fP to read another
line-separated list of translated entries over standard input. For example,
assuming the following list of untranslated entries:

.PP
.in +4n
.EX
Hello
Goodbye
Race
Laps
.EE
.in
.PP

The list of translated entries shall be matched against the untranslated
entries. Following the example above, a Spanish translation could look like
this:

.PP
.in +4n
.EX
Hola
Adiós
Carrera
Vueltas
.EE
.in
.PP

Apart from translations, \fBsd2-translate\fP also takes care of other low-level
details required by the engine, such as bumping version numbers on parameter
files inside the \fBconfig/\fP directory. Also, it avoids changing the layout
and comments in parameter files, as a way to keep diffs small and readable.

In order to achieve this, \fBsd2-translate\fP implements a limited and
somewhat naive XML parser that injects XML nodes while respecting the original
indentation, since traditional XML parsers would instead rewrite the file
entirely to their own liking.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-h\fP, \fB--help\fP
Show a short manual about options
.TP
\fB-v\fP, \fB--version\fP
Show the actual game version
.TP
\fB-l\fP, \fB--localdir\fP local dir
Set the run-time user settings folder
(default = ~/.speed-dreams-2, unless not using the default CMake configuration for building)
.TP
\fB-L\fP, \fB--libdir\fP lib dir
Set the run-time library folder (default = /usr/local/lib[64]/games/speed-dreams-2,
unless not using the default CMake configuration for building)
.TP
\fB-D\fP, \fB--datadir\fP data dir
Set the run-time data folder (default = /usr/local/share/games/speed-dreams-2,
 unless not using the default CMake configuration for building)
.TP
\fB-B\fP, \fB--bindir\fP bin dir
Set the run-time binary data folder
(default = /usr/local/games, unless not using the default CMake configuration for building)
.TP
\fB-m\fP, \fB--hardmouse\fP
Use hardware mouse cursor
.TP
\fB-e\fP, \fB--tracelevel\fP trace level threshold
Set the trace level threshold to the given integer value
(0=Fatal, 1=Error, 2=Warning, 3=Info, 4=Trace, 5=Debug, ... ;
 default = Debug, unless not using the default CMake configuration for building)
Only traces with lower or equal level will appear in the trace stream
Note: May be disabled if CMake option 'OPTION_DEBUG' is not true at build time)
.TP
\fB-t\fP, \fB--tracestream\fP target trace stream
Set the target stream for the traces (among 'stdout', 'stderr' or <file name>) ;
 default = stderr, unless not using the default CMake configuration for building))
Note: May be disabled if CMake option 'OPTION_DEBUG' is not true at build time)
.TP
\fB-t\fP, \fB--target\fP
Set target language. Although not required, the use of three-letter language
codes, such as those defined by ISO 639-3, is recommended.
.TP
\fB-l\fP, \fB--language\fP
Set common name for the target language (e.g.: Esperanto, English, Russian, etc.),
as displayed by \fBdata/menu/languagemenu.xml\fP.
Required unless \fB-o\fP, \fB--output\fP is used.
.TP
\fB-r\fP, \fB--ref\fP
Sets the reference language code, defaults to \fBcat\fP. This is required since
Speed Dreams does not provide a list of translatable strings, and therefore
\fBsd2-translate\fP must rely on a previous translation (Catalan being the most
complete as of the time of this writing) to perform heuristics and determine
which strings are translatable.
.TP
\fB-i\fP, \fB--input\fP
Sets the input file to a line-separated list of untranslated entries, as
previously returned by the \fB-o|--output\fP flag.
.TP
\fB-o\fP, \fB--output\fP
Tells \fBsd2-translate\fP not to translate any entries and, instead, sets the
output file to a line-separated list of untranslated entries, that can be later
fed as \fB-i|--input\fP.

.SH LICENSE
\fBsd2-translate\fP is licensed under the GNU General Public License,
version 2 or later.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2025 Xavier Del Campo Romero
.P
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Xavier Del Campo Romero <xavi92@disroot.org>,
based on previous work by Jean-Philippe Meuret <pouillot@users.sourceforge.net>
and TORCS 1.2.2 version by Rudy Godoy <rudy@kernel-panik.org>,
for the Debian project ; of course, it may be used by any other.
.SH BUG REPORTS
Please submit fixes and/or improvements to:
.br
https://forge.a-lec.org/speed-dreams/speed-dreams-code/issues
.SH SEE ALSO
Web site: http://www.speed-dreams.net/
.br
Forgejo: http://forge.a-lec.org/speed-dreams/
.br
ISO 639-3: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-3
.br
LibreTranslate: https://libretranslate.com
.br
speed-dreams-2(6), sd2-trackgen(6), sd2-accc(6), sd2-nfs2ac(6), sd2-nfsperf(6)
